doc/guides/dts/design.rst, before:

.. _dt-design:

Design goals
############

Zephyr's use of devicetree has evolved significantly over time, and further
changes are expected. The following are the general design goals, along with
specific examples about how they impact Zephyr's source code, and areas where
more work remains to be done.

Single source for all hardware information
******************************************

Zephyr shall obtain its hardware descriptions exclusively from devicetree.

Examples
========

- New device drivers shall use :ref:`existence macros <dt-existence-macros>` to
  determine whether a device is available and enabled.

- In-tree sample applications shall use :ref:`aliases <dt-alias-chosen>` to
  determine which of multiple possible generic devices of a given type will be
  used in the current build. For example, the :ref:`blinky-sample` uses this to
  determine the LED to blink.

Example remaining work
======================

- Zephyr's :ref:`sanitycheck_script` currently uses :file:`board.yaml` files to
  determine the hardware supported by a board. This should be obtained from
  devicetree instead.

- Various device drivers currently use Kconfig to determine which instances of a
  particular compatible are enabled. This can and should be done with devicetree
  overlays instead.

- Board-level documentation still contains tables of hardware support which are
  generated and maintained by hand. This can and should be obtained from the
  board level devicetree instead.

- Runtime determination of ``struct device`` relationships should be done using
  information obtained from devicetree, e.g. for device power management.

- Pin muxing and pin control, at least at boot time, should be accomplished via
  devicetree.

Source compatibility with other operating systems
*************************************************

Zephyr's devicetree tooling is based on a generic layer which is interoperable
with other devicetree users, such as the Linux kernel.

Zephyr's binding language *semantics* can support Zephyr-specific attributes,
but shall not express Zephyr-specific relationships.

Examples
========

- Zephyr's devicetree source parser, :ref:`dtlib.py <dt-scripts>`, is
  source-compatible with other tools like `dtc`_ in both directions:
  :file:`dtlib.py` can parse ``dtc`` output, and ``dtc`` can parse
  :file:`dtlib.py` output.

- Zephyr's "extended dtlib" library, :file:`edtlib.py`, shall not include
  Zephyr-specific features. Its purpose is to provide a higher-level view of the
  devicetree for common elements like interrupts and buses.

  Only the high-level :file:`gen_defines.py` script, which is built on top of
  :file:`edtlib.py`, contains Zephyr-specific knowledge and features.

.. _dtc: https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/utils/dtc/dtc.git/about/

Example remaining work
======================

- Zephyr has a custom :ref:`dt-bindings` language *syntax*. While Linux's
  dtschema does not yet meet Zephyr's needs, we should try to follow what it is
  capable of representing in Zephyr's own bindings.

- Due to namespace collisions and inflexibility in the bindings language,
  Zephyr-specific :ref:`dt-macros` do not support the full set of possible node
  paths and bindings supported by Linux.

- Devicetree source sharing between Zephyr and Linux is not done.

To be determined
****************

The scope and amount of code generation for device instantiation has been the
subject of extended discussion and prototyping without reaching a firm
conclusion.

Commit message:

doc: dts: revisit documentation
This is joint work with Kumar Gala (see signed-off-by).

Document the changes to the generated node macros in macros.bnf,
moving the old file to legacy-macros.bnf and putting it in its own
section.

The actual generated macros are now a low-level detail, so rewrite the
foregoing sections as examples in terms of the new <devicetree.h> APIs.

Signed-off-by: Martí Bolívar <marti.bolivar@nordicsemi.no>
Signed-off-by: Kumar Gala <kumar.gala@linaro.org>

doc/guides/dts/design.rst, after:

.. _dt-design:

Design goals
############

Zephyr's use of devicetree has evolved significantly over time, and further
changes are expected. The following are the general design goals, along with
specific examples about how they impact Zephyr's source code, and areas where
more work remains to be done.

Single source for all hardware information
******************************************

Zephyr shall obtain its hardware descriptions exclusively from devicetree.

Examples
========

- New device drivers shall use devicetree APIs such as :c:func:`DT_HAS_NODE` to
  determine whether a device is available and enabled.

- In-tree sample applications shall use :ref:`aliases <dt-alias-chosen>` to
  determine which of multiple possible generic devices of a given type will be
  used in the current build. For example, the :ref:`blinky-sample` uses this to
  determine the LED to blink.

Example remaining work
======================

- Zephyr's :ref:`sanitycheck_script` currently use :file:`board.yaml` files to
  determine the hardware supported by a board. This should be obtained from
  devicetree instead.

- Various device drivers currently use Kconfig to determine which instances of a
  particular compatible are enabled. This can and should be done with devicetree
  overlays instead.

- Board-level documentation still contains tables of hardware support which are
  generated and maintained by hand. This can and should be obtained from the
  board level devicetree instead.

- Runtime determination of ``struct device`` relationships should be done using
  information obtained from devicetree, e.g. for device power management.

- Pin muxing and pin control, at least at boot time, should be accomplished via
  devicetree.

Source compatibility with other operating systems
*************************************************

Zephyr's devicetree tooling is based on a generic layer which is interoperable
with other devicetree users, such as the Linux kernel.

Zephyr's binding language *semantics* can support Zephyr-specific attributes,
but shall not express Zephyr-specific relationships.

Examples
========

- Zephyr's devicetree source parser, :ref:`dtlib.py <dt-scripts>`, is
  source-compatible with other tools like `dtc`_ in both directions:
  :file:`dtlib.py` can parse ``dtc`` output, and ``dtc`` can parse
  :file:`dtlib.py` output.

- Zephyr's "extended dtlib" library, :file:`edtlib.py`, shall not include
  Zephyr-specific features. Its purpose is to provide a higher-level view of the
  devicetree for common elements like interrupts and buses.

  Only the high-level :file:`gen_defines.py` script, which is built on top of
  :file:`edtlib.py`, contains Zephyr-specific knowledge and features.

.. _dtc: https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/utils/dtc/dtc.git/about/

Example remaining work
======================

- Zephyr has a custom :ref:`dt-bindings` language *syntax*. While Linux's
  dtschema does not yet meet Zephyr's needs, we should try to follow what it is
  capable of representing in Zephyr's own bindings.

- Due to namespace collisions and inflexibility in the bindings language,
  Zephyr cannot support the full set of possible node paths and bindings
  supported by Linux.

- Devicetree source sharing between Zephyr and Linux is not done.

To be determined
****************

The scope and amount of code generation for device instantiation has been the
subject of extended discussion and prototyping without reaching a firm
conclusion.
